# Biblical Baby Name Trends in the United States
#### Video Demo:  https://youtu.be/KHHp_fB9pAU
#### Description:
In this project, I analyized the popularity of biblical-origin baby names in the US since 1880. To this end, the code creates both animated and static visualizations of the popularity of each name in the top 50 names for each year. The visualizations differentiate between whether the name appears in the Hebrew Bible (TaNaK, or Torah, Prophets, and Writings), or appears only in the New Testament. The project is coded in Python, and uses the pandas, numpy, matplotlib, glob, and re (regular expression) modules.

Baby name data was collected from the Social Security Administration website: https://www.ssa.gov/oact/babynames/limits.html This file https://www.ssa.gov/oact/babynames/names.zip lists the number of babies that were given each name every year from 1880 to present. The zip file contains a text file for each year. Each file contains three columns. They indicate the gender, the name, and the number of babies given that name each year. The code uses the glob module to create a Python list of the file names in the baby name directory. It then opens two additional files.

One of these files is a csv file listing all of the characters/people in the Hebrew bible, obtained from Data.World: https://data.world/bradys/bibledata-person. The columns in this file are person_id (a unique identifier, e.g. Cain_1), person_name (the not necessarily unique name of the person, e.g. Cain), surname (blank for most persons), unique_attribute, sex, tribe, and person_notes. Note that many names in the Hebrew Bible are shared by a number of people, living in different generations. The other file is a textfile of the New Testament, newTestament.txt.

The pandas .isin() method is used in looping through the names each year to identify whether each name appears in the file of Hebrew Bible names, and the number of babies given that name that year is stored in a new pandas data frame column. A boolean column in the dataframe indicates whether each name occurs in the Hebrew bible. This column of zeros and ones allows calculation of the total number of baies with Hebrew Bible names and the total number of babies named each year, in addition to the total number of names each year.

The original goal of the project, was only to identify the prevalence, year by year, of Hebrew Bible names in the US population. However, having accomplished that task, I thought it would be interesting to also track the prevalence of New Testament names--names that appear in the New Testament, but not in the Hebrew Bible, such as Paul, Timothy, Andrew, etc. This goal was somewhat more complex, as I could not locate a file of just names from the New Testament. However, finding a text file of the complete New Testament was easy. The challenge is that some American names, particularly in the last few decades are words that appear in the New Testament, but not as names of people. Examples include River, Sky, Charity, etc. The method in this case is to filter the New Testament for only capitalized words. I then compare each name from the social security data files with the list of capitalized New Testament words. Sentences that begin with nouns that have become names are relatively rare, so this method catches most of the spurious name identifications. In fact, the name prevalence data is almost unchanged even without this filtering, but this did at least remove River, Sky, and the names of flowers and virtues from the list of potential New Testament names. A challenge that will take some additional work is processing nicknames that have become names (e.g. Mike vs. Michael), and names of Biblical origin which use spellings that have evolved in languages other than English before appearing in the US baby names, e.g. Ysaye vs. Isaiah, or Elsbeth and Elisabeth vs. Elizabeth.

To visualize the data, I created plots using matplotlib for the 50 most popular baby names each year. The plots show the rank and number of babies with each name, split by gender. If the name appears in the New Testament only, it is colored blue. If the name appears in the Hebrew Bible, it appears in purple, even if the same name is also used in the New Testament.

One general pattern is that popular male baby names remain popular for a longer period overall that popular female baby names. An obvious exception is the name Mary, which was the number one girl baby name from 1880 to 1957! For much of that period Mary was more that twice as popular as the second most popular name at the time.

Another general truism is that New Testament names have been more popular than "Old Testament" or Hebrew Bible names thought the entire time period 1880-2021 in both genders. However that popularity gap has grown smaller in both genders over the past 141 years. Among male baby names, New Testament names have ranged between 18% and 34% of the total annual birth population, while Hebrew Bible, or "Old Testament" names have ranged between 9% and 20% of the total annual birth population. Among female babies, New Testament names have ranged between 16% and 3% of the total annual birth population, while "Old Testament" or Hebrew Bible names have been more steady among female babies at between 3% and 6% over the entire period of available data.

An interesting trend has been, again in both genders, that New Testament names have become relatively less common since the nineteenth century, while Old Testament, or Hebrew Bible names have held steady or grown in popularity. Over a period of several decades Biblical names in general, and Old Testament names in particular became much more popular between 1970 and 1984, and among male babies, Old Testament names have been more popular in the time period 1980-present than at any previous time in the available data.

To visualize the changing popularity of the top 50 names, I used ffmpeg from the command line. I moved all of the name_vs_rank_YYYY.png files to a subdirectory then executed:

ffmpeg -framerate 1 -pattern_type glob -i '*.png'  name_vs_rank_by_year.mp4

to generate an animated mp4 visualization, and

$ convert -delay 100 -loop 0 *.png name_vs_rank_by_year.gif

A distribution often found in bodies of natural language is known as the Zipf distribution. In this distribution, the a word's rank is proportional to its frequency in the lexicon. Thus, the second most common word is half as common as the most common word. The third most common word is one third as common as the most common word, etc. I was curious to test the distribution of names vs. Zipf's law. So I plotted the number of each name vs. its rank on a log log plot. For names from the 100th to 10,000th most common, there is a good approximate adherance to a Zipf distribution--at least there is a linear spectrum with a slop around negative one. However for the hundred most common names, there is a significant departure from Zipf distribution. At times, as is the case with Mary for much of the first 50 years of data, the most common name is *much* more common than the next few most popular names. However, the second to tenth most common names are often much closer in number to each other than what would be predicted by a Zipf distribution, and as a result the spectrum of name number vs rank is generally relatively flat on the upper left (high frequency, low rank), taking the form of a blade up hockey stick.

A final question that I wondered about was the length of names (number of letters) in each gender vs. each other and vs. time. There is basically no difference in name length between genders or over time over the past 141 years. I determined this by making histograms of name length in each gender each year as I also plotted the name number vs rank data.

This study answered many of my questions about biblical name prevalence in the US. I was not surprised to find that the New Testament names were more common in the US population during this time period. I was also not surprised to see that biblical names were both more common and more stable among male babies. However, I was surprised by the generally monotonic decline in New Testament names among female babies over the last 141 year. I am also intersted to do further investigation to find what factors may have caused the increase in the popularity of biblical names between the 1960s and the 1980s in the US population.